Title: PhysVid: Physics Aware Local Conditioning for Generative Video Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26285v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:59:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# PhysVid: Physics Aware Local Conditioning for Generative Video Models 

## Saurabh Pathak Elahe Arani Mykola Pechenizkiy Bahram Zonooz Eindhoven University of Technology 

{s.pathak,e.arani,m.pechenizkiy,b.zonooz }@tue.nl 

## 5aurabhpathak.github.io/PhysVid “A car gliding over a road slick with rainwater.” 

“A wine bottle pours a red blend into a glass.” 

> PhysVid Wan -14B  PhysVid Wan -14B

“A blender spins, mixing squeezed juice within it.” 

“A waterfall cascades over jagged rocks.” 

Figure 1. Videos generated by PhysVid with 1.7 billion parameters, compared to videos generated by Wan-14B [ 47 ] on VideoPhy [ 3 ]captions. Despite the smaller model size, PhysVid achieves better physical realism in generated videos. 

## Abstract 

Generative video models achieve high visual fidelity but of-ten violate basic physical principles, limiting reliability in real -world settings. Prior attempts to inject physics rely on conditioning: frame -level signals are domain - specific and short - horizon, while global text prompts are coarse and noisy, missing fine - grained dynamics. We present PhysVid, a physics -aware local conditioning scheme that operates over temporally contiguous chunks of frames. Each chunk is annotated with physics - grounded descriptions of states, interactions, and constraints, which are fused with the global prompt via chunk - aware cross - attention during training. At inference, we introduce negative physics prompts (descrip-tions of locally relevant law violations) to steer generation away from implausible trajectories. On VideoPhy, PhysVid improves physical commonsense scores by ≈ 33% over base-line video generators, and by up to ≈ 8% on VideoPhy2. These results show that local, physics - aware guidance sub-stantially increases physical plausibility in generative video and marks a step toward physics-grounded video models. 

## 1. Introduction 

Generative video models have seen a remarkable improve-ment in aesthetic realism and video quality in the past few years, exemplified by successful commercial models such as Sora [ 8] and Genie [ 9]. However, despite being trained on enormous datasets, they still face difficulties in generating videos that faithfully adhere to the physical laws observed in nature and inherent in the data [ 30 , 38 ]. This inability points to the challenge and possibly the existence of a fundamental ceiling on learning to generate physically accurate videos from data alone, without any explicit mechanism to incorpo-rate the underlying physics. This problem has been acknowl-edged in the literature and methods have been proposed to improve the physical accuracy of generated videos by incor-porating explicit physics-based constraints or models into 1

> arXiv:2603.26285v1 [cs.CV] 27 Mar 2026

the generation process [ 18 , 20 , 35 , 49 , 56 , 58 , 61 , 63 , 65 , 66 ]. However, these methods apply physics conditioning at the entire time scale of a video, which limits their ability to capture fine-grained physical phenomena that evolve over shorter time scales. To address this limitation, we aim to discover the physics information that arises at temporally local levels in the data and inject it as an additional sequence-aware conditioning in the generative architecture, distinct from the traditional Text-to-Video (T2V) pathway. The key inspiration to focus on local temporal segments during the video generation process comes from the obser-vation that global text conditioning may be insufficient to capture the intricate physical interactions that occur over subintervals. Previous approaches have focused on enhanc-ing global prompts with physics-based information [ 56 , 65 ]. However, doing so does not guarantee that the model will fo-cus on relevant details within the appropriate subinterval of the video being generated. Although effective for static im-age generation, recent research has shown that global cross-attention mechanism that applies the same textual guidance across all frames can be suboptimal for video generation, as the model may struggle to interpret the temporal logic of the prompt, leading to a failure to generate details specific to local time intervals [ 16 , 36 , 55 , 67 ]. This limitation is demon-strated in models where temporally consistent textual guid-ance results in nearly static attention maps for action-related words over time, causing the generated video to exhibit static or incoherent motion due to the spatiotemporal misalignment of global conditioning with generated frames [ 16 , 45 ]. For this reason, the motion of objects, changes in lighting con-ditions, and interactions between elements in a scene often occur rapidly and can be better described when considered in smaller intervals. By conditioning each temporal seg-ment on relevant physics principles within it, we can ensure that it adheres to physical laws more closely, resulting in a coherent and realistic overall video. We are also inspired by recent progress in video-based world modeling, where video generation is dynamically controlled with frame-level modulations [ 14 , 17 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 60 , 67 ]. We extend this idea of frame-level control to physics conditioned video generation over short temporal fragments. The proposed approach PhysVid , involves the following steps: First, the target video is segmented into smaller tempo-ral fragments. Next, the observable physical phenomena in each segment are analyzed, identifying key physical dimen-sions such as motion dynamics, shape deformations, and opti-cal effects with the help of a Vision Language Model ( VLM ). This information is used to annotate each segment with a corresponding physics-aware prompt to directly support its content during generation. Finally, we train a video genera-tion model with temporally aware cross-attention layers that incorporate the segment-level physics-based prompts along-side the global text prompt. This allows the model to respond to both the global context and local physical phenomena dur-ing generation. We validate our approach through extensive experiments on the WISA-80k dataset [49]. In summary, we propose the following key contributions. • We incorporate additional text conditioning pathways into a T2V generator. In contrast to frame-level action condi-tioning and global text conditioning, our method acts on groups of frames. Working at the chunk 1 level preserves sufficient temporal information necessary to observe phys-ical laws locally, such as motion, while avoiding locally irrelevant pieces of information from the global text. • We create a separate text prompt for each chunk using a VLM . During generation, each chunk is supported by its own physics based text conditioning in addition to the global T2V prompt. • During inference, we also generate counterfactual prompts for each chunk based on the violation of locally observ-able physics laws. We use these prompts to guide the video generation away from the physically implausible scenarios. In the following sections, we first describe the back-ground, followed by a description of PhysVid. We then report the results of our experiments and conclude with a discussion section. 

## 2. Background 

2.1. Generative Text-to-Video modeling 

Several methods to generate videos from text descrip-tion have been proposed in the literature. Earlier meth-ods that laid the foundation for conditional video gen-eration were based on Generative Adversarial Networks ( GAN s) [ 15 , 32 , 33 ]. However, these approaches suffered from training instability and temporal consistency. Later work shifted towards transformer based autoregressive T2V generation [ 26 , 46 , 52 , 53 ]. These models, characterized by sequential prediction of discrete video tokens, can gen-erate videos faster than their predecessors. However, they are susceptible to rapid accumulation of errors, leading to degradation of temporal coherence over long sequences. In contrast, diffusion based methods avoid the need for discrete tokenization by operating in continuous spaces. A large body of work has adapted existing Text-to-Image ( T2I ) ar-chitectures for video tasks, bypassing the need for massive text-video datasets [ 1 , 5– 7, 19 , 31 , 43 , 48 , 50 , 54 , 62 , 68 ]. This is achieved by modifying the internal mechanisms of T2I models, such as by augmenting with additional tem-poral layers, structuring latents, or attention techniques to create temporal consistency. With increased availabil-ity of large T2V datasets such as OpenVid [ 39 ], Web-Vid [ 2] and Panda [ 13 ], a growing line of work has fo-

> 1We use the term “chunk” to refer to a temporally contiguous set of frames from a video.

2cused on spatiotemporal diffusion by directly modeling videos in 4D pixel or latent spaces, thus denoising all frames jointly without relying on image based spaces or T2I back-bones [ 23 , 24 , 37 , 42 , 59 ]. Beyond diffusion, recent work has begun to explore flow -matching techniques [ 34 ] for video generation, requiring much fewer generation steps than diffusion based models [ 11 , 12 , 29 , 41 , 47 ]. In this con-text, we consider a T2V generative model G that iteratively transforms over T time steps, a 4D Gaussian noise sample 

xT ∼ N (0 , I) ∈ RF ×C×H×W under a conditional text prompt c, into a video x0 that follows the content described in c.

Cross attention in T2V modeling. Architecturally, T2V models have progressed from 3D U - Net backbones [ 24 ]that denoise spatiotemporal volumes, to Diffusion Trans-formers ( DiT s) [ 40 ] that scale more effectively and capture longer - range dependencies with space–time self-attention. The text conditioning in DiT benefits significantly from its cross-attention mechanism, where the visual features of the noisy latent video act as the ‘query’, while the embeddings from a text encoder serve as the ‘key’ and ‘value’. This allows the model to dynamically weigh the importance of different parts of the text prompt for different spatiotempo-ral locations in the generated video. However, in prevalent T2V pipelines, cross-attention operates globally. Every spa-tiotemporal token in the video latent attends to the same time - agnostic text tokens, thus textual guidance is applied across frames without frame specific conditioning. This ap-proach is inefficient across temporal semantics that change over time, motivating our approach that ties different cap-tions to temporal segments for improved temporal alignment. 

2.2. Physics-aware video generation 

A recent line of research has focused on explicitly incor-porating physical principles into the video generation pro-cess. Existing approaches include the use of physics sim-ulators [ 18 , 35 ], the incorporation of physical constraints into loss functions during training [ 49 , 65 , 66 ], as guidance mechanisms during inference [ 20 , 63 ], or the use of mod-ular approaches that incorporate physical awareness into visual generation through multistage generation processes or specialized modules [35, 49, 56, 58, 65]. “Force Prompt-ing” [ 18 ] is a technique in which video generation is con-ditioned on explicit physical forces. This method allows a user to apply localized or global forces, such as pushes or winds, to an initial image. The model then generates a video sequence in which objects react according to these physical inputs, enabling a form of interactive and physically responsive video synthesis. DiffPhy [ 65 ] employs a Large Language Model ( LLM ) to analyze a text prompt and infer its underlying physical context, such as gravity, collisions, or momentum. The LLM generates an enhanced, physics-aware prompt that provides explicit guidance to the video VLM     

> Global Text Caption 𝑐 !
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 "
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 #
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 $
> VLM instruction to create physics aware annotation
> Video
> Figure 2. Procedure for generating physics-grounded local prompts during data annotation.

diffusion model. To ensure that the final output adheres to these principles, a multimodal LLM acts as a supervisor, evaluating the physical correctness of the generated frames, and guiding the model’s training process. PhyT2V [ 56 ] is a training-free method that improves the physical realism of videos generated through multiple rounds of generation and refinement. In this method, an initial T2V prompt is used to generate a video which is then captioned. An LLM then refines the prompt for the subsequent round based on mismatches between the caption and the current prompt. This approach eventually improves the physical plausibil-ity of the generated video, but requires several rounds of generation. Hao et al. [20] recently proposed a training-free approach that uses LLM to reason about the governing phys-ical principles corresponding to a T2V prompt and generates a counterfactual prompt that violates them. During inference, both the original and the counterfactual prompts are used in a guidance based generation mechanism similar to Classifier-Free Guidance ( CFG ) [ 22 ]. WISA [ 49 ] decomposes abstract physical principles into textual descriptions, qualitative cat-egories, and quantitative properties, and injects them via a mixture of physical experts and a physical classifier. It also curates a dataset that covers diverse laws in dynamics, thermodynamics, and optics to train and evaluate physics compliance. VideoREPA [ 66 ] transfers physics understand-ing from video foundation models to T2V models using cross distillation losses, aligning intraframe spatial and inter-frame temporal relations to improve physical commonsense without relying on physics specialized datasets. 

## 3. Method 

The central objective of the proposed approach is to improve the overall quality of observable physical phenomena in the generated videos. To that end, we incorporate additional text 3Global Text Caption 𝑐 !      

> Physics Annotation 𝑐 "
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 #
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 $
> Concatenate
> Flow matching loss
> Predicted video 𝑥 %&"Noised video 𝑥 %
> Chunk Aware Cross Attention
> Local context tokens
> 𝑄
> 𝐾
> 𝑉
> RoPE Attention
> +
> Gate
> AdaLN
> Processed tokens
> Processed tokens
> Global Attention Block
> Local Attention Block

Figure 3. Architecture of PhysVid showing local information pathways with chunk aware cross-attention. Commonly applied procedures such as tokenization, latent encoding, and decoding are implicit and not shown. 

conditioning based on local physical phenomena observed within smaller temporal segments of the video. This local conditioning is used in conjunction with global T2V con-ditioning to enhance the physical realism of the generated videos. Specifically, given a global prompt cg , and a set of 

k local prompts C := {c1, . . . , c k} based on physics and aligned with cg , our physics-aware generative video model G

generates a video x0 grounded in both cg and C, by iterative denoising over T steps. 

xT −1 = G(xT , c g , C, T ) xT ∼ N (0 , I ) (1) In this section, we first describe the procedure for generat-ing physics-based annotations for local conditioning. Subse-quently, we describe our chunk-aware cross-attention mecha-nism that powers the local conditioning pathway, inserted as additional layers in the base architecture. Lastly, we explain the inference process that involves counterfactual generation to enable guidance. 

3.1. Annotation of video chunks 

Given a training dataset of videos paired with text captions, we first annotate each video with chunk-level physics-based prompts. To do this, we divide each video in the training data set into a set of contiguous fixed-duration temporal chunks, with a fixed number of frames comprising each chunk. As shown in Fig. 2, each chunk is then separately analyzed by a VLM to identify the visible elements and physical phenom-ena contained within that segment. While analyzing each chunk separately in this manner helps to focus on the local information, it risks the generated annotations becoming mis-aligned with the global caption or even directly contradicting it in the worst case. We address this by also providing the global T2V prompt to the VLM as part of its instructions when processing each chunk and encourage it to align its annotations with the visible content without contradicting the global T2V prompt. The VLM generates a structured description of physical phenomena within the chunk, focus-ing on visible physical phenomena. We instruct the VLM to focus on three key categories of physics information: dynam-ics, shape, and optics. The instructions provided to the VLM encourage it to work step by step in a structured manner. This ensures that the descriptions are physically accurate and rel-evant to the video chunk. In addition, we apply constrained generation techniques to strictly enforce this structure in the output [ 51 ]. The structured output from the VLM is parsed to extract the relevant physics information, which is then converted into a concise text prompt corresponding to that video chunk. This prompt is used as local conditioning for that chunk during the training. An example of the prompt used to guide the VLM is provided in Appendix 7.1. 

3.2. Local conditioning with cross-attention 

Given the annotated dataset with chunk-level physics-based prompts, we train a model to incorporate this local condi-tioning. The general architecture of the model is illustrated in Fig. 3 and the procedure is described in Algorithm 1. Specifically, we employ chunk-aware local cross-attention in which Rotary Positional Embeddings ( RoPE ) [ 44 ] is applied to both vision and text modalities. Similarly to standard self-attention, video query tokens are modulated by RoPE 4LLM LLM       

> Global Text Caption  𝑐 !
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 "
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 #
> Physics Annotation 𝑐 $
> LLM instruction to create physics aware annotation
> Counterfactual Physics Annotation 𝑐 "
> %
> Counterfactual Physics Annotation 𝑐 #
> %
> Counterfactual Physics Annotation 𝑐 $
> %
> LLM instruction to create counterfactual physics annotation

Figure 4. Generation of local and counterfactual prompts during inference. 

parameterized by the 3D spatiotemporal grid (frame, height, width). However, we also apply RoPE to text key projec-tions with an identical frequency basis for both video query and text key projections. To track positional awareness of chunks within the local textual information flow, we de-fine a text grid that includes a chunk axis aligned to the number of video chunks. In this manner, cross-attention logits become explicitly cross-modal position aware. It en-ables a video token to attend differently to text information from a different chunk compared to text assigned to its own chunk. This design contrasts with conventional text - to - video cross - attention, in which only video queries carry video positional encoding, and text keys follow one -dimensional textual positions, thereby lacking frame - aligned coupling. These modules are then inserted into a pretrained model inside each transformer block and trained with flow match-ing [ 34 ]. This chunk-wise design enforces local temporal neighborhoods, while a parallel global cross-attention path preserves long-range conditioning. In general, this design promotes temporally grounded text-video alignment while remaining compatible with standard T2V architectures. 

3.3. Inference with local counterfactual guidance 

During inference, only the global T2V captions are avail-able, since the videos must be generated from pure noise. Therefore, to supply the local conditioning pathways in the model, we generate the local captions from only the global text prompt, as shown in Fig. 4. Here, we instruct a LLM to generate a set of prompts grounded in local physics for an “imagined” video clip using only the information present in the global text. These prompts are required to be temporally coherent. In addition, a local prompt is allowed to contain information that is not mentioned in the global prompt, as long as it does not break alignment with the global prompt or the preceding local prompts. It is important to note that dur-ing inference, the annotations corresponding to all chunks in a video are generated together, in contrast to the training data annotation process explained in Sec. 3.1. This is done because of the lack of local visual data during inference and also to reduce overhead. The instruction used for LLM to generate these prompts is provided in Appendix 7.3. 

Counterfactual generation. In addition to generating a prompt that accurately describes the physical phenomena in each chunk, we also generate a corresponding counterfactual that deliberately violates those phenomena using a process similar to Hao et al. [20] . To create a counterfactual prompt, an LLM first identifies key visual and physics-relevant ele-ments in the “original” local prompt generated previously. It then generates a counterfactual statement that directly con-tradicts these physics observations, while still being relevant to the visual elements in the original. The generated coun-terfactual prompts are used during the inference stage to guide the model away from generating physically inaccurate content. The instruction used to generate the counterfactual prompt is shown in the Appendix 7.2. During inference, we use both positive and counterfactual local prompts to guide the generation process. We employ classifier-free guidance [ 22 ] at both global and chunk levels, as follows. 

xT −1 =(1 + w) · G (xT , c g , C, T )− (2) 

w · G (xT , c n, C ′, T ),

where cn is a fixed global negative prompt similar to Wan [ 47 ]. C′ is the set of counterfactual prompts paired with the set of corresponding physics-based prompts C, and 

w is the guidance scale. Other terms are similar to Eq. (1). This strategy enhances the physical accuracy of the generated videos by reinforcing correct physics while discouraging in-correct representations, effectively steering the model away from generating content that violates physical laws. In the next section, we demonstrate that, equipped with the attributes described in this section, PhysVid is capable of inducing adherence to physical principles in the synthesized video content. 

## 4. Experiments 

We begin this section with an explanation of our setup and data preparation procedure and the choice of evaluation benchmarks. Subsequently, we present quantitative and qual-itative results on the evaluation benchmarks, comparing our method with the baselines and the previous literature. Fi-nally, we present the results of the ablation experiments that analyze the impact of our method with and without the aid of counterfactual guidance during generation and compare it with plain finetuning. 

4.1. Setup 

Data. We use the WISA [ 49 ] data set that contains a diverse collection of more than 80 thousand videos related to various 5physical phenomena observed in the world. Following the configuration in Wan [ 47 ], we remove videos less than 5

seconds long and divide the remaining videos into 5 second clips sampled at 832 × 480 at 16 frames per second, leading to a total of 81 frames per video. This results in approxi-mately 53 thousand video samples. Note that while WISA provides detailed physics annotations for each of their train-ing samples, we do not utilize them in our approach, relying instead on learning this information purely from the training videos. This is because these annotations are at a global level and do not focus on physical phenomena observed within smaller temporal segments of the video. Furthermore, due to the division of long videos into 5 second clips, these global annotations become misaligned with the video clips and may lead to noisy conditioning if used directly. This strategy also has the added benefit of making our approach gener-alizable to other datasets that do not contain such explicit information about physical phenomena. Subsequently, we generate our own chunk-level physics-based prompts using the method described in Section 3 as well as a global text caption for the entire video. We use VideoLLama3-7B [64] for this task. First, we generate a global caption for the entire 

5 second video clip. Thereafter, the video is divided into 7

temporally contiguous chunks of frames of approximately 

0.7 seconds each. Next, we generate a segment-level prompt using the video chunk along with the global caption as in-put to the VLM , processing each chunk separately in this manner. Examples of the generated prompts are provided in Appendix 8. 

Model. We introduce chunk-aware cross-attention layers in each transformer block in a pretrained Wan2.1 [ 47 ] model with 1.3 billion-base parameters. The entire architecture is trained in two stages. First, the base model is frozen, and only the newly added modules are trained for 1000 steps. Once they have stabilized, the base layers are unfrozen, and the entire model is further trained for additional 2000 steps. We use 4 GPUs for this task, leading to an effective batch size of 64 samples per step. To generate annotations during inference as discussed in Sec. 3, we utilize VideoLLama3-7B as a language model. 

4.2. Evaluation benchmarks 

We use two recently proposed and widely adopted bench-marks, VideoPhy [ 3] and VideoPhy2 [ 4 ], to evaluate the physical accuracy of the generated videos. VideoPhy con-sists of 344 manually curated captions in three different categories of physical interactions, namely, “solid-solid”, “solid-fluid”, and “fluid-fluid”. Similarly, VideoPhy2 uses a larger test set with 590 captions providing coverage over a diverse set of real-world physical phenomena. Their data is divided into two main action categories: “object inter-actions” and “sports and physical activities”. Both these benchmarks include an additional category comprising of    

> Table 1. Results on VideoPhy and VideoPhy2. We report semantic alignment (SA) and physical commonsense (PC; higher is better). PhysVid (1.7B) achieves the best PC on both benchmarks ( ≈33%
> relative gain on VideoPhy and over 8% on VideoPhy2 vs. Wan-14B).

Method Params (B) VideoPhy VideoPhy2 SA PC SA PC Wan-1.3B 1.3 0.46 0.24 0.28 0.61 

Wan-14B 14 0.52 0.24 0.29 0.59 

PhysVid 1.7 0.43 0.32 0.28 0.64  

> Figure 5. VideoPhy Physical Commonsense ( PC ) score by category.

manually labeled “hard” examples. In addition, they provide an automatic evaluation model that is trained on human anno-tations of the generated videos. As a result, their evaluation scores are correlated with human judgment of physical cor-rectness. We follow the same scoring mechanism as outlined in the respective original works. All results are reported as the mean of the benchmark scores for 5 different evaluation sets generated with different random seeds. We present the results next. 

4.3. Results 

4.3.1. Quantitative results VideoPhy. Table 1 shows the performance of PhysVid on the VideoPhy benchmark compared to two Wan2.1 base-lines. With a model size of only 1.7B parameters, PhysVid significantly outperforms both the smaller (1.3B) and the much larger (14B) base model in the physical commonsense metric by ≈ 33% . Furthermore, this performance gain is reflected across all subcategories in the benchmark as shown in Fig. 5, demonstrating the effectiveness of local informa-tion in improving physical awareness of the generative video model. 

VideoPhy2. As shown in Tab. 1, PhysVid performs, re-6Figure 6. VideoPhy2 Physical Commonsense ( PC ) score by cate-gory. 

spectively, ≈ 5% and ≈ 8% better than the corresponding baselines on the physical commonsense score. As Fig. 6 shows, this improvement is consistent across both “object in-teraction” and “sports and physical activities” subcategories of the benchmark, as well as on the captions that are cat-egorized by the benchmark as hard to generate accurately. Compared to VideoPhy, the improvements of our method are significantly less pronounced on VideoPhy2. The reason behind this could be the difference in the score calculation method between the two evaluation approaches. Specifically, VideoPhy2 uses a categorical rating system in contrast to VideoPhy, which uses a rating on a continuous scale of 0 and 

1, followed by hard thresholding [3, 49]. 

Comparisons with existing approaches. Table 2 shows the performance of existing methods on the widely adopted VideoPhy benchmark. We collate results from previous work and ours. From this table, it can be observed that the physical accuracy of generative video models does not necessarily scale up with the model size. Furthermore, the performance of a generative video model may vary significantly across multiple evaluations. Although this could be due to differ-ences in underlying settings ( e.g ., number of denoising steps), it is important to remember that the VideoPhy auto-evaluator is trained to imitate human judgment on the generated videos, which is subjective in nature and inherently noisy. Neverthe-less, existing results show that with just a 1.7 billion total parameters, PhysVid remains competitive on the VideoPhy benchmark and is on par with the current state-of-the-art, matching or even surpassing many of the larger models. 

4.3.2. Qualitative results 

Figure 1 shows qualitative results on VideoPhy examples. Videos generated with PhysVid show a visible improvement in the physical fidelity of the content, in contrast to more than 

8× larger Wan-14B model. Additional qualitative results are        

> Table 2. Quantitative comparisons of our approach with previ-ous works evaluated on the VideoPhy benchmark, including both general and physics-aware generative video methods. Symbols indi-cate results taken from prior work: WISA [ 49 ] ( †),VideoREPA [ 66 ]($), Hao et al. [20] (#),PhyT2V [ 56 ] ( ∼),VideoPhy [ 3] ( ‡). Our own baselines are marked with ∗. Best model scores are underlined. For physics-aware methods with multiple entries, we report the best PC score, with parentheses showing relative improvement over the corresponding baseline.

Method SA PC Lavie ‡ 0.49 0.28 

Lavie $ 0.49 0.32 

VideoCrafter2 † 0.47 0.36 

VideoCrafter2 ‡ 0.49 0.35 

VideoCrafter2 $ 0.50 0.30 

VideoCrafter2 ∼ 0.24 0.15 

OpenSora # 0.38 0.43 

OpenSora ‡ 0.18 0.24 

OpenSora ∼ 0.29 0.17 

HunYuanVideo † 0.46 0.28 

HunYuanVideo $ 0.60 0.28 

Cosmos-7B † 0.57 0.18 

Cosmos-7B # 0.52 0.27 

CogVideoX-2B ‡ 0.47 0.34 

CogVideoX-2B $ 0.52 0.26 

CogVideoX-2B ∼ 0.22 0.13 

CogVideoX-5B † 0.60 0.33 

CogVideoX-5B ‡ 0.63 0.53 

CogVideoX-5B $ 0.63 0.31 

CogVideoX-5B # 0.48 0.39 

CogVideoX-5B ∼ 0.48 0.26 

Wan2.1-1.3B ∗ 0.46 0.24 

Wan2.1-14B # 0.49 0.35 

Wan2.1-14B ∗ 0.52 0.24 

Physics-aware approaches PhyT2V [56] 0.59(+23%) 0.42(+62%) 

PhyT2V † 0.61(+2%) 0.37(+12%) 

WISA [49] 0.67(+12%) 0.38(+15%) 

VideoREPA-5B [66] 0.72(+14%) 0.40(+29%) 

Hao et al. [20] 0.49(+0%) 0.40(+14%) 

PhysVid-1.7B 0.43( −7%) 0.32(+33%) 

available in Appendix 9.1. 

4.3.3. Ablations 

We perform analysis on the effectiveness of applying lo-cally grounded physics-based text conditioning in generative video modeling in contrast to learning physics information 7Table 3. Ablations. The highest scores in each metric are highlighted, whereas the lowest scores are underlined. 

Method VideoPhy VideoPhy2 SA PC SA PC baseline (Wan-1.3B) 0.4570 0.2401 0.2845 0.6144 

fine tuning 0.4174 0.2866 0.2765 0.6261 

PhysVid w/o counterfactual guidance 0.4355 0.2924 0.2791 0.6334 

PhysVid 0.4302 0.3169 0.2775 0.6411 Prompt: “A mixing spoon stirring hot chocolate in a cup.” 

> PhysVid
> PhysVid
> (without
> Counterfactual
> Prompting)
> Baseline
> Finetuned
> Figure 7. Qualitative ablation example on a VideoPhy prompt. Best viewed when zoomed in.

purely from data and standard text conditioning. To that end, we finetune 1.3B baseline with the same dataset but without adding any chunk-aware cross attention layers. Fur-thermore, to understand the role of counterfactual physics guidance, we also tested the performance of our model both with and without using counterfactual guidance during infer-ence. When inference is performed without using counter-factual prompts, we apply blank local prompts to all local chunks during classifier-free guidance. We evaluate all the approaches on both VideoPhy and VideoPhy2. It is evident from the results in Tab. 3 that the use of our method pro-vides clear advantages over pure finetuning. In addition, applying negative physics conditioning to local pathways during guidance based generation further improves the Phys-ical Commonsense ( PC ) score. This is also reflected in our qualitative analysis in Fig. 7. 

## 5. Discussion 

We have presented PhysVid , a method to improve aware-ness of physical phenomena in generative video modeling by injecting physics knowledge into text prompts aligned with the local temporal segments of a video being gener-ated. We extract this information from videos in the training data using a pretrained VLM . The VLM is instructed to annotate each chunk of frames with the relevant physics information visible within the chunk. This information is injected into a pretrained generative video model with the help of additional cross attention blocks that employ RoPE to align each annotation with its corresponding chunk. We evaluate this approach on VideoPhy and VideoPhy2, two of the widely adopted benchmarks for the evaluation of physi-cal plausibility in generative T2V models. The results show a clear improvement in the physical fidelity of the videos generated across both benchmarks. Although we employ a context-specific dataset with labeled physics information, our approach instead relies on its ability to extract this in-formation directly from videos and can do so at a temporal granularity higher than that available within the dataset. This quality makes our approach applicable to generic datasets. Further discussion of closely related works and the limita-tions of our method is provided in Appendix 6. As generative video models embark on a journey toward genuine world simulators, ensuring that their output adheres to fundamental physical laws becomes paramount for their application in high-stakes domains such as robotics, health-care, and autonomous systems. By introducing a method for localized, physics-aware conditioning, this work contributes a meaningful step toward that ambitious goal. 8Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by the EU funded SYNER-GIES project (Grant Agreement No. 101146542 ). We also gratefully acknowledge the TUE supercomputing team for providing the SPIKE-1 compute infrastruc-ture to carry out the experiments reported in this paper. 

## References 

[1] Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Harry Yang, Sonal Gupta, Jia-Bin Huang, Jiebo Luo, and Xi Yin. Latent-shift: Latent diffu-sion with temporal shift for efficient text-to-video generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08477 , 2023. 2 [2] Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, G ¨ul Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 1728–1738, 2021. 2 [3] Hritik Bansal, Zongyu Lin, Tianyi Xie, Zeshun Zong, Michal Yarom, Yonatan Bitton, Chenfanfu Jiang, Yizhou Sun, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya Grover. Videophy: Evaluating phys-ical commonsense for video generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 1, 6, 7 [4] Hritik Bansal, Clark Peng, Yonatan Bitton, Roman Golden-berg, Aditya Grover, and Kai-Wei Chang. Videophy-2: A challenging action-centric physical commonsense evaluation in video generation. CoRR , abs/2503.06800, 2025. 6 [5] Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat, Junhwa Hur, Guanghui Liu, Amit Raj, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for video generation. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 2 [6] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, Varun Jampani, and Robin Rombach. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. CoRR , abs/2311.15127, 2023. [7] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dock-horn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with la-tent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22563–22575, 2023. 2 [8] Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, et al. Video generation models as world simulators. 

OpenAI Blog , 1(8):1, 2024. 1 [9] Jake Bruce, Michael D. Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, Yusuf Aytar, Sarah Bechtle, Feryal M. P. Behbahani, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Nicolas Heess, Lucy Gonzalez, Simon Osin-dero, Sherjil Ozair, Scott E. Reed, Jingwei Zhang, Konrad Zolna, Jeff Clune, Nando de Freitas, Satinder Singh, and Tim Rockt ¨aschel. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In 

ICML , 2024. 1 [10] Minghong Cai, Xiaodong Cun, Xiaoyu Li, Wenze Liu, Zhaoyang Zhang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Xiangyu Yue. Ditctrl: Exploring attention control in multi-modal diffusion transformer for tuning-free multi-prompt longer video gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 7763–7772, 2025. 2 [11] Yang Cao, Zhao Song, and Chiwun Yang. Video latent flow matching: Optimal polynomial projections for video interpo-lation and extrapolation. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Deep Generative Model in Machine Learning: Theory, Principle and Efficacy , 2025. 3 [12] Shoufa Chen, Chongjian Ge, Yuqi Zhang, Yida Zhang, Fengda Zhu, Hao Yang, Hongxiang Hao, Hui Wu, Zhichao Lai, Yifei Hu, et al. Goku: Flow based video generative foun-dation models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 23516–23527, 2025. 3[13] Tsai-Shien Chen, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Eka-terina Deyneka, Hsiang-wei Chao, Byung Eun Jeon, Yuwei Fang, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jian Ren, Ming-Hsuan Yang, et al. Panda-70m: Captioning 70m videos with multiple cross-modality teachers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13320–13331, 2024. 2 [14] Xinle Cheng, Tianyu He, Jiayi Xu, Junliang Guo, Di He, and Jiang Bian. Playing with transformer at 30+ fps via next-frame diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01380 , 2025. 2 [15] Kangle Deng, Tianyi Fei, Xin Huang, and Yuxin Peng. Irc-gan: Introspective recurrent convolutional gan for text-to-video generation. In IJCAI , pages 2216–2222, 2019. 2 [16] Jiasong Feng, Ao Ma, Jing Wang, Bo Cheng, Xiaodan Liang, Dawei Leng, and Yuhui Yin. Fancyvideo: Towards dynamic and consistent video generation via cross-frame textual guid-ance. CoRR , abs/2408.08189, 2024. 2 [17] Shenyuan Gao, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Kashyap Chitta, Yihang Qiu, Andreas Geiger, Jun Zhang, and Hongyang Li. Vista: A generalizable driving world model with high fidelity and ver-satile controllability. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 2 [18] Nate Gillman, Charles Herrmann, Michael Freeman, Daksh Aggarwal, Evan Luo, Deqing Sun, and Chen Sun. Force prompting: Video generation models can learn and generalize physics-based control signals. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 2, 3 [19] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yao-hui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. In The Twelfth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 2[20] Yutong Hao, Chen Chen, Ajmal Saeed Mian, Chang Xu, and Daochang Liu. Enhancing physical plausibility in video generation by reasoning the implausibility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24702 , 2025. 2, 3, 5, 7 [21] Haoran He, Yang Zhang, Liang Lin, Zhongwen Xu, and Ling Pan. Pre-trained video generative models as world simulators. 

9In ICLR 2025 Workshop on World Models: Understanding, Modelling and Scaling , 2025. 2 [22] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications , 2021. 3, 5 [23] Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303 , 2022. 3 [24] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:8633–8646, 2022. 3 [25] Susung Hong, Junyoung Seo, Heeseong Shin, Sunghwan Hong, and Seungryong Kim. Large language models are frame-level directors for zero-shot text-to-video generation. In 

First Workshop on Controllable Video Generation @ICML24 ,2024. 2 [26] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 2 [27] Siqiao Huang, Jialong Wu, Qixing Zhou, Shangchen Miao, and Mingsheng Long. Vid2world: Crafting video diffusion models to interactive world models. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2505.14357 , 2025. 2 [28] Sangwon Jang, Taekyung Ki, Jaehyeong Jo, Jaehong Yoon, Soo Ye Kim, Zhe Lin, and Sung Ju Hwang. Frame guid-ance: Training-free guidance for frame-level control in video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07177 , 2025. 2 [29] Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang, Yang Song, Yadong MU, and Zhouchen Lin. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video generative modeling. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 3 [30] Bingyi Kang, Yang Yue, Rui Lu, Zhijie Lin, Yang Zhao, Kaixin Wang, Gao Huang, and Jiashi Feng. How far is video generation from world model: A physical law perspective, 2025. 1 [31] Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tade-vosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot video generators. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 15908–15918, 2023. 2 [32] Doyeon Kim, Donggyu Joo, and Junmo Kim. Tivgan: Text to image to video generation with step-by-step evolutionary generator. IEEE Access , 8:153113–153122, 2020. 2 [33] Yitong Li, Martin Min, Dinghan Shen, David Carlson, and Lawrence Carin. Video generation from text. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , 2018. 2 [34] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maxim-ilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for genera-tive modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 3, 5 [35] Shaowei Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Saurabh Gupta, and Shenlong Wang. Physgen: Rigid-body physics-grounded image-to-video generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision ECCV , 2024. 2, 3 [36] Yang Luo, Xuanlei Zhao, Mengzhao Chen, Kaipeng Zhang, Wenqi Shao, Kai Wang, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang You. Enhance-a-video: Better generated video for free. CoRR ,abs/2502.07508, 2025. 2 [37] Willi Menapace, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Ivan Skorokhodov, Ekaterina Deyneka, Tsai-Shien Chen, Anil Kag, Yuwei Fang, Aleksei Stoliar, Elisa Ricci, Jian Ren, et al. Snap video: Scaled spatiotemporal transformers for text-to-video synthe-sis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7038–7048, 2024. 3 [38] Saman Motamed, Laura Culp, Kevin Swersky, Priyank Jaini, and Robert Geirhos. Do generative video models learn physi-cal principles from watching videos? arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2501, 2025. 1 [39] Kepan Nan, Rui Xie, Penghao Zhou, Tiehan Fan, Zhen-heng Yang, Zhijie Chen, Xiang Li, Jian Yang, and Ying Tai. Openvid-1m: A large-scale high-quality dataset for text-to-video generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2 [40] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-national conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 3 [41] Adam Polyak, Amit Zohar, Andrew Brown, Andros Tjandra, Animesh Sinha, Ann Lee, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Chih-Yao Ma, Ching-Yao Chuang, David Yan, Dhruv Choudhary, Dingkang Wang, Geet Sethi, Guan Pang, Haoyu Ma, Ishan Misra, Ji Hou, Jialiang Wang, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kunpeng Li, Luxin Zhang, Mannat Singh, Mary Williamson, Matt Le, Matthew Yu, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Peizhao Zhang, Pe-ter Vajda, Quentin Duval, Rohit Girdhar, Roshan Sumbaly, Sai Saketh Rambhatla, Sam S. Tsai, Samaneh Azadi, Samyak Datta, Sanyuan Chen, Sean Bell, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shelly Sheynin, Siddharth Bhattacharya, Simran Motwani, Tao Xu, Tianhe Li, Tingbo Hou, Wei-Ning Hsu, Xi Yin, Xiaoliang Dai, Yaniv Taigman, Yaqiao Luo, Yen-Cheng Liu, Yi-Chiao Wu, Yue Zhao, Yuval Kirstain, Zecheng He, Zijian He, Albert Pumarola, Ali K. Thabet, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Arun Mallya, Baishan Guo, Boris Araya, Breena Kerr, Carleigh Wood, Ce Liu, Cen Peng, Dmitry Vengertsev, Edgar Sch ¨onfeld, El-liot Blanchard, Felix Juefei-Xu, Fraylie Nord, Jeff Liang, John Hoffman, Jonas Kohler, Kaolin Fire, Karthik Sivakumar, Lawrence Chen, Licheng Yu, Luya Gao, Markos Georgopou-los, Rashel Moritz, Sara K. Sampson, Shikai Li, Simone Parmeggiani, Steve Fine, Tara Fowler, Vladan Petrovic, and Yuming Du. Movie gen: A cast of media foundation models. 

CoRR , abs/2410.13720, 2024. 3 [42] Can Qin, Congying Xia, Krithika Ramakrishnan, Michael Ryoo, Lifu Tu, Yihao Feng, Manli Shu, Honglu Zhou, Anas Awadalla, Jun Wang, et al. xgen-videosyn-1: High-fidelity text-to-video synthesis with compressed representations. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 249–265. Springer, 2024. 3 

10 [43] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 2 [44] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568:127063, 2024. 4, 1 [45] Ye Tian, Ling Yang, Haotian Yang, Yuan Gao, Yufan Deng, Jingmin Chen, Xintao Wang, Zhaochen Yu, Xin Tao, Pengfei Wan, et al. Videotetris: Towards compositional text-to-video generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:29489–29513, 2024. 2 [46] Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kin-dermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 2 [47] Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Xiaofeng Meng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yi-jing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yitong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. CoRR , abs/2503.20314, 2025. 1, 3, 5, 6 [48] Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Modelscope text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571 , 2023. 2 [49] Jing Wang, Ao Ma, Ke Cao, Jun Zheng, Jiasong Feng, Zhanjie Zhang, Wanyuan Pang, and Xiaodan Liang. WISA: World simulator assistant for physics-aware text-to-video generation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 2, 3, 5, 7 [50] Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi Wang, Ceyuan Yang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, et al. Lavie: High-quality video generation with cascaded latent diffusion models. International Journal of Computer Vision , 133(5):3059–3078, 2025. 2 [51] Brandon T Willard and R ´emi Louf. Efficient guided generation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09702 , 2023. 4 [52] Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14806 , 2021. 2 [53] Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. N ¨uwa: Visual synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In European Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 720–736, 2022. 2 [54] Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for text-to-video generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 7623–7633, 2023. 2 [55] Tian Xia, Xuweiyi Chen, and Sihan Xu. Unictrl: Improving the spatiotemporal consistency of text-to-video diffusion mod-els via training-free unified attention control. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. 2 [56] Qiyao Xue, Xiangyu Yin, Boyuan Yang, and Wei Gao. Phyt2v: Llm-guided iterative self-refinement for physics-grounded text-to-video generation. CoRR , abs/2412.00596, 2024. 2, 3, 7 [57] Xin Yan, Yuxuan Cai, Qiuyue Wang, Yuan Zhou, Wenhao Huang, and Huan Yang. Long video diffusion generation with segmented cross-attention and content-rich video data curation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 3184–3194, 2025. 2 [58] Xindi Yang, Baolu Li, Yiming Zhang, Zhenfei Yin, Lei Bai, Liqian Ma, Zhiyong Wang, Jianfei Cai, Tien-Tsin Wong, Huchuan Lu, et al. Vlipp: Towards physically plausible video generation with vision and language informed physical prior. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23368 , 2025. 2, 3 [59] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, Da Yin, Yuxuan.Zhang, Weihan Wang, Yean Cheng, Bin Xu, Xiaotao Gu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 3 [60] Jiwen Yu, Yiran Qin, Xintao Wang, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, and Xihui Liu. Gamefactory: Creating new games with gen-erative interactive videos. CoRR , abs/2501.08325, 2025. 2 [61] Shenghai Yuan, Jinfa Huang, Yujun Shi, Yongqi Xu, Rui-jie Zhu, Bin Lin, Xinhua Cheng, Li Yuan, and Jiebo Luo. Magictime: Time-lapse video generation models as metamor-phic simulators. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 47(9):7340–7351, 2025. 2 [62] Xin Yuan, Jinoo Baek, Keyang Xu, Omer Tov, and Hongliang Fei. Inflation with diffusion: Efficient temporal adaptation for text-to-video super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision , pages 489–496, 2024. 2 [63] Ye Yuan, Jiaming Song, Umar Iqbal, Arash Vahdat, and Jan Kautz. PhysDiff: Physics-Guided Human Motion Diffusion Model . In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 15964–15975, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Society. 2, 3 [64] Boqiang Zhang, Kehan Li, Zesen Cheng, Zhiqiang Hu, Yuqian Yuan, Guanzheng Chen, Sicong Leng, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Peng Jin, Wenqi Zhang, Fan Wang, Lidong Bing, and Deli Zhao. Videollama 3: Frontier multi-modal foundation models for image and video understanding. 

CoRR , abs/2501.13106, 2025. 6 

11 [65] Ke Zhang, Cihan Xiao, Yiqun Mei, Jiacong Xu, and Vishal M. Patel. Think before you diffuse: Llms-guided physics-aware video generation, 2025. 2, 3 [66] Xiangdong Zhang, Jiaqi Liao, Shaofeng Zhang, Fanqing Meng, Xiangpeng Wan, Junchi Yan, and Yu Cheng. Video-REPA: Learning physics for video generation through rela-tional alignment with foundation models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 2025. 2, 3, 7 [67] Guangcong Zheng, Jianlong Yuan, Bo Wang, Haoyang Huang, Guoqing Ma, and Nan Duan. Frame-level captions for long video generation with complex multi scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20827 , 2025. 2 [68] Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo: Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018 , 2022. 2 

12 PhysVid: Physics Aware Local Conditioning for Generative Video Models 

# Supplementary Material 

## 6. Additional Information 

We begin with preliminaries, wherein we provide a brief overview of RoPE followed by a procedural description of the chunk aware cross-attention mechanism to augment the discussion in Sec. 3. Subsequently, we supplement Sec. 5 with a discussion of works closely related to PhysVid fol-lowed by a discussion on its limitations and future opportu-nities for contribution. 

6.1. Rotary Positional Embeddings (RoPE) 

RoPE is an established method for encoding positional in-formation within transformer-based models that uniquely captures both absolute and relative positional data through vector rotations [ 44 ]. Fundamentally, the goal is to apply a set of block-diagonal rotation matrices R to the query vec-tors q and the key vectors k at each position. Thus, the transformations for the d dimensional query vector qm and the key vector kn at the positions m and n, respectively, are 

q′ 

> m

= Rmqm k′ 

> n

= Rnkn (3) where Rm and Rn are the corresponding block-diagonal rotation matrices consisting of d/ 2 blocks. Each diagonal block Rm,i in Rm corresponds to dimensions 2i − 1, 2i and is defined as 

Rm,i =

cos( mθ i) − sin( mθ i)sin( mθ i) cos( mθ i)



(4) where θi is a predefined frequency term. Since RTmRn =

Rn−m, this design ensures that the inner product of the rotated query and key vectors (q′

> m

)T k′ 

> n

depends only on the original query and key vectors and their relative distance, 

n − m.

6.2. Chunk aware cross attention procedure 

In PhysVid, the chunk-wise positional alignment between visual query tokens and textual key tokens within the local pathway is achieved through a coherent grid-based encod-ing scheme. The procedure is described in Algorithm 1. Specifically, the text tokens from all video segments are con-catenated and introduced into the local attention pathways as illustrated in Fig. 3. To preserve and utilize the contextual position of each token, a two-dimensional coordinate grid is imposed on the set of text key tokens. Within this grid, the first dimension indexes the corresponding video chunk, while the second dimension identifies the intra-chunk posi-tion. RoPE is then applied to encode these 2D coordinates in the representation of each key token. This design ensures that global and local positional information is preserved for each token throughout the network. Thus, the subsequent cross-attention mechanism can attend to localized content across all chunks, while maintaining precise chunk-specific referencing and temporal awareness. 

Algorithm 1 Chunk Aware Cross-Attention 

Require: Video tokens X ∈ RB×Lv ×H×d ▷ L v : video sequence length 

Require: Local text representations {T (b)}Nb 

> b=1

for Nb video chunks 

Require: Video grid Gv ∈ NB×3, RoPE frequencies Ω

Require: Number of chunks Nb, per-chunk text length Lc

Ensure: Updated video representation ˆX after chunk aware cross-attention 

// 1. Concatenate local text across all chunks  

> 1:

T ← Concat( T (1) , T (2) , . . . , T (Nb)) ▷ Single sequence of length Lt = Nb · Lc

// 2. Build 2D grid over local text tokens. Initialize 

Gt ∈ NB×3 as follows:  

> 2:

Gt[: , 0] ← Nb ▷ first grid dimension = chunk index  

> 3:

Gt[: , 1] ← Lc ▷ second grid dimension = intra-chunk position  

> 4:

Gt[: , 2] ← 1 ▷ dummy spatial axis to share ApplyRoPE API for both video and text tokens 

// 3. Compute query, key, and value representations  

> 5:

Q ← ProjectAndNormalize Video( X, W q ) ▷ Video queries  

> 6:

K ← ProjectAndNormalize Text( T, W k) ▷ Local text keys  

> 7:

V ← Project Text( T, W v ) ▷ Local text values 

// 4. Apply RoPE using video and text grids  

> 8:

eQ ← ApplyRoPE( Q, G v , Ω) ▷ Encode video tokens with (frame, height, width) positions  

> 9:

eK ← ApplyRoPE( K, G t, Ω) ▷ Encode text tokens with (chunk, intra-chunk) positions 

// 5. Multi-head cross-attention over all concatenated chunks  

> 10:

ˆX ← MultiHeadAttention( eQ, eK, V ) ▷ Attend from each video token to all local text tokens across chunks  

> 11:

return ˆX ▷ Video features updated with chunk-aware local text information 16.3. Related work 

The proposed work is in line with recent studies that address the limitations of cross-attention mechanisms within gener-ative Text-to-Video ( T2V ) frameworks based on Diffusion Transformers ( DiT s). A closely related concept is “Seg-mented Cross-Attention” introduced in Presto [ 57 ], where a prompt is divided into sub-captions using a LLM , each aligned to a specific temporal segment of the video. This method is a parameter-free mechanism for generating long-range videos that follow a sequence of narrative instructions derived from the main caption. Similarly, DiTCtrl [ 10 ] is a training-free method that enables multi-prompt video gen-eration by controlling attention to create smooth transitions between different textual conditions over time. These meth-ods aim to improve narrative coherence using explicit sub-prompts that are generated purely from text or are explicitly provided, while still relying on modulation of the global attention pathway. Although PhysVid also aligns textual information with local temporal segments, its objective and mechanism are distinct. In contrast to these methods, our method does not redesign or modulate the core attention module. Instead, we introduce new, separate cross-attention blocks as a modular addition to a pretrained model, specifi-cally to integrate the chunk-wise generated physics prompts, thereby complementing the global prompt without affecting its attention pathways. 

6.4. Limitations and future scope 

Although video-understanding capabilities in VLM s have improved significantly in recent years, they are still prone to hallucination and can produce information that is completely incorrect or misaligned with the visual content presented. This fundamental challenge currently limits their ability to reliably extract physics information from longer videos or videos with complex spatiotemporal physical content. Fur-thermore, annotating larger datasets with VLM also requires an additional compute budget. Another challenge is scal-ability to larger models, since the model size can increase quickly due to additional layers in each transformer block. Therefore, an observed improvement in the physical aware-ness of the resulting model comes at the cost of slower train-ing and inference over the corresponding baseline. However, this challenge can be mitigated to some extent with the help of advanced techniques for faster sampling, such as model distillation. A more theoretical limitation is the classic train-test distribution mismatch, since, during inference, VLM does not have visual input to generate local annotations and must rely on global text alone. However, the video genera-tor always sees the same interface, which is a sequence of local physics-aware text prompts. The mismatch therefore lies only in the upstream prompt generation bounded by the consistency with which the VLM maps global descriptions to local physics statements with and without visual input. Our experiments on two benchmarks indicate that this does not prevent robust gains in the Physical Commonsense ( PC )score. Finally, as described in Sec. 3, while including global T2V prompt in the instruction to the VLM during the anno-tation of a video chunk helps generate annotations that are aligned with the global prompt, they do not explicitly prevent semantic misalignment of annotations among different video chunks. Future work could explore measures to reduce the computational cost of additional local pathways and improve alignment of locally extracted physics information across all chunks. 

## 7. VLM Instructions 

In this section, we provide the details on the instructions given to the VLM for different use cases. 

7.1. Physics grounded video chunk annotation 

Figure 8 shows the VLM input instruction used to generate physics grounded annotations for video chunks prior to train-ing. During annotation, the global T2V caption is appended to the VLM instruction along with a contiguous chunk of frames from the input video, as discussed in Sec. 3. 

7.2. Counterfactual annotation 

Figure 9 shows the VLM input instruction used to generate the counterfactual prompt based on incorrect physics. The counterfactual annotation in our method relies only on the generated “positive” local prompt for a given chunk and does not use any other information. As discussed in Sec. 3, this helps prevent the generation of physically correct descrip-tions which are undesirable in this phase. 

7.3. Physics-grounded local prompt generation dur-ing inference 

During inference, the visual data is not available. However, we still need the local physics based instructions to be pro-vided as input to the model. To ensure this, we use the VLM instruction shown in Fig. 10. This instruction relies only on the information contained in the global T2V caption to generate a coherent set of physically correct local prompts. 

## 8. Annotation Examples 

In Fig. 11, we visualize the global and local annotations generated by VLM for an example in the training data set, together with the representative frames for each chunk. Sim-ilarly, during inference, Fig. 12 we provide the local an-notations generated by the VLM for an example caption, along with the representative frames from the video chunks generated using these annotations. 2You will be provided a short video clip taken from a longer video. In addition, you will also receive a caption as input. The ca ption describes 

the overall event or scene happening in the longer video and may contain information that is not visible in the short clip. T he duration of the 

clip is less than one second. Your task is to provide a structured description of the physical phenomena grounded in the clip , f ocusing only on 

VISIBLE elements in the clip and not on any elements that are not visible. Your description would be used to recreate the sho rt video clip in a 

physically accurate manner by a downstream video generator, therefore it needs to be physically accurate and consistent with the visible 

elements in the clip. The information contained within the description should only be enough to describe the physical phenome na contained 

within that small time segment (less than a second). The description should not contain contradictory statements about events ob served in the 

clip. 

Perform the following reasoning steps: 

1. Understand the given video with the help of the accompanying caption, focusing on the events happening in sequential order .

2. Analyze the visible elements in the video, including objects, people, animals, and environmental features. 

3. Analyze relevant physics observations related to VISIBLE elements and how they OBEY physical laws, considering the followi ng domains: 

- a. Dynamics (motion, forces, energy, momentum): understand what is moving, how it is moving and why is it moving 

- b. Shape (deformation, elasticity): understand the shapes of visible objects and if they are deforming or maintaining their shape 

- c. Optics (illumination, ambience, reflections, refractions, shadows): understand the lighting conditions, reflections, and shadows 

4. Based on step 3, think about how these physics principles could be structured as a prompt to a video generator so that it can recreate the 

video. 

5. Structure your response as a JSON string according to the example below. Only include observations that are clearly visibl e i n the video. 

You will be REWARDED for generating statements that are GROUNDED in physics and VERIFIABLE from the video, and PENALIZED for 

generating statements that are incorrect in physics, not verifiable from the video, not relevant to any physical phenomena, o r c opying 

statements from prompt. Maximize rewards and minimize penalties. 

Follow comments in the example below to guide your reasoning: 

{

"visible_elements ": ["sports car", wheels, "road", "trees", "sunlight", "shadows", "reflections"], 

"thinking": "", //Think about what are the most important physical properties that would help a downstream video generator recreate the 

exact same video. Cannot be blank. 

"physics": "The car's speed is consistent with its motion. The road texture moves backward as the car moves forward. The r otation speed 

of the wheels matches the car's speed on the ground. The car's shape remains consistent as it moves. The wheels maintain thei r c ircular shape 

while rotating. The lighting is consistent with a sunny day. Trees cast shadows on the ground according to the position of th e s un. Reflections 

on the car's surface change as it moves.", //Explain briefly how the video obeys physics laws. Cannot be blank. 

}

Now, let's analyze the following video clip along with its caption given below. Proceed step -by -step as instructed above. 

Video caption: Figure 8. VLM instruction to generate the physics caption for a video chunk 

## 9. Additional Results 

9.1. Qualitative examples 

To supplement the examples in Fig. 1, we visualize additional results generated by our method in Fig. 13 with comparisons to Wan-14B. In Fig. 14, we also provide additional qualita-tive results from the ablation study discussed in Sec. 4.3.3, to supplement Fig. 7. These examples are also available as videos along with additional video examples on our project website. 

9.2. Similarity metrics 

We evaluated PhysVid on four similarity metrics as shown in Tab. 4. As can be observed, the results remain consis-tent, showing a slightly increased FVD score relative to the finetuned baseline, which corroborates the previously noted minor compromise in content fidelity (see Tab. 1) in exchange for substantial improvements in physical realism. Model LPIPS ↓ FVD ↓ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑

Wan 1.3B 0.703 417.352 0.217 8.625 Wan (finetuned) 0.671 302.465 0.239 9.379 PhysVid 0.679 318.087 0.240 9.234 

Table 4. Additional metrics based on similarity (2048 sample pairs) 

## 10. Other details 

Configuration. Table 5 lists hyperparameter configurations and other relevant settings for training and inference. 

VLM overhead. The average VLM overhead for all prompts generated per sample is ≈ 17 .22 ± 0.99 seconds. Including the denoising loop runtime quantified in Tab. 5, overall, PhysVid approach takes 110 seconds per video, which is near third ( 0.35 ×) of 310 seconds per video latency of Wan-14B. All inference run times in our work are reported with 

bfloat16 precision on a single B200 GPU with a batch size of 1. 3You will be provided a physics -rich description of a scene. Perform the following reasoning steps: 

1. Identify key elements, objects and environmental features identifiable from the scene description. 

2. Each statement in the input belongs to one of three categories of statements: dynamics, shape, and optics. Look at each in put statement one -

by -one and identify which category it belongs to. 

3. As a physicist, predict what would happen instead if physics laws were NOT obeyed within that category. 

4. Based on step 3, think about a video that would result from VIOLATION of physics laws in each category and generate a desc rip tion for 

that video. Ensure that your description clearly violates the physics laws within the identified category. 

5. Structure your response. You will be REWARDED for generating statements that are unrealistic in physics, and PENALIZED for 

generating statements that are correct in physics, not relevant to any physics phenomena, or copying input. Maximize rewards and minimize 

penalties. 

Example Input: 

The car's motion is smooth. The road texture moves backward as the car moves forward. The rotation speed of the wheels matche s t he car's 

speed. The car's shape remains consistent as it moves. The wheels maintain their circular shape while rotating. The lighting is consistent with 

a sunny day. Trees cast shadows on the ground according to the position of the sun. Reflections on the car's surface change a s i t moves. 

Example output: 

{

"visible_elements ": ["car", "wheels", "road", "trees", "sunlight", "shadows", "reflections"], 

"thinking": "To describe a video that violates physics laws, I need to focus on unrealistic motion dynamics, shape deforma tions, and 

incorrect optical effects related to the car, its wheels, the road, trees, sunlight, shadows, and reflections.", //Explain br ief ly how a video that 

does NOT follow physics laws would look like. Cannot be blank. 

"physics": "The car's speed varies unrealistically. The road texture moves forward as the car moves forward. The rotation speed of the 

wheels does not match the car's speed. The car's shape changes significantly as it moves. The wheels lose their circular shap e w hile rotating. 

The lighting is inconsistent with a sunny day. Trees do not cast shadows on the ground according to the position of the sun. Ref lections on the 

car's surface remain static as it moves." 

}

Explanation of how the output was generated: 

What would happen if physics laws were NOT obeyed within each category: 

- Dynamics: The car's speed could vary unrealistically. The road texture could move forward as the car moves forward. The rotat ion speed of 

the wheels may not match the car's speed. The car could be flying or hovering above the ground. 

- Shape: The car's shape could change as it moves. The wheels might not be circular shape while rotating. 

- Optics: The lighting would be inconsistent with a sunny day. Trees will not cast shadows on the ground according to the posit ion of the sun 

or there may be irregularly shaped shadows not matching the object's shape. Reflections on the car's surface may remain stati c a s it moves. 

Now, let's consider the input given below STEP -BY -STEP. 

Input: Figure 9. VLM instruction to generate the counterfactual physics caption 

4You will be provided a caption describing an event or a scene. Your task is to provide a set of SEVEN captions describing the ph ysical 

phenomena grounded in the original caption. The set of captions would be used to generate a video that is physically accurate an d grounded in 

the original caption. Each caption would be used sequentially by the downstream video generator to generate a short chunk of vid eo. Each 

caption therefore needs to be physically accurate and consistent with the original caption. Each caption should describe a small time segment 

of the overall event or scene. The set of captions should together cover the entire event or scene described in the original cap tion leading to a 

coherent video when stitched together. The information contained within each caption should only be enough to describe the ph ysi cal 

phenomena contained within the corresponding small time segment (less than a second). A caption should not describe an event that is not 

possible within the small time segment, but it can build on events from previous segments. Do not describe any elements that are not visible in 

the scene or are impossible to visualize. Do not output any statements that directly contradict the input. 

Perform the following reasoning steps: 

1. Imagine a short, few seconds scene based on the caption. Identify key elements, objects and environmental features identif iab le from the 

caption that may be visible in the scene. Do not include any elements that are not visible. 

2. Analyze relevant physics observations related to these elements and how they OBEY physical laws, considering the following do mains: 

- a. Dynamics (motion, forces, energy, momentum): understand what is moving, how it is moving and why is it moving 

- b. Shape (deformation, elasticity): understand the shapes of objects as mentioned in the caption and if they are deforming or maintaining 

their shape 

- c. Optics (illumination, ambience, reflections, refractions, shadows): understand the lighting conditions, reflections, and shadows 

3. Based on step 2, think about how these physics principles could be structured as a set of seven temporally correlated prom pt sequence to a 

video generator so that it can recreate the scene described in the original input caption. 

4. Structure your response as a JSON string according to the example below. Output only those statements that are relevant to th e input. You 

will be REWARDED for generating statements that are GROUNDED in physics and the original input, and PENALIZED for generating 

statements that are incorrect in physics, completely unrelated to the input, not relevant to any physical phenomena, or copyi ng statements 

from input. Maximize rewards and minimize penalties. 

Example Input: 

A car moving along the road on a sunny day. 

Example Output (follow the comments in the code for instructions on how to generate outputs): 

{

"thinking": "To describe a video that follows physics laws, I need to focus on realistic motion dynamics, shape consistenc y, and accurate 

optical effects related to the car, its wheels, the road, trees, sunlight, shadows, and reflections.", //Think about what are th e most important 

physical properties that would help a downstream video generator produce the exact same video. Cannot be blank. 

"visible_elements ": ["sports car", wheels, "road", "trees", "sunlight", "shadows", "reflections"], 

"physics": [ 

"The car accelerates smoothly along the road, with its speed consistent with its motion.", 

"The road texture moves backward relative to the car's forward motion, creating a realistic sense of movemen t.", 

"The wheels rotate at a speed that matches the car's forward velocity, ensuring proper traction and motion d ynamics.", 

"The car maintains its shape as it moves, with no visible deformations or alterations.", 

"The wheels retain their circular shape while rotating, demonstrating structural integrity.", 

"The lighting conditions reflect a sunny day, with consistent brightness and color throughout the scene.", 

"Trees cast accurate shadows on the ground based on the sun's position, enhancing the realism of the environ ment." 

] //Describe SEVEN different temporally correlated captions that help recreate the imaginary video that obeys physical laws. Each 

caption should describe a small time segment of the overall event or scene described in the original caption leading to a coherent video when 

stitched together. Each caption should be physically accurate and consistent with the original input and the preceding captio ns. 

}

Now, let's analyze the following caption. Proceed step -by -step as instructed above. 

Caption: Figure 10. VLM instruction to generate the local physics captions for all the chunks to be generated at once during inference 

5“The cars are moving forward due to their engines. The streetlights and buildings do not move because they are fixed structur es. 

The Christmas lights and ornaments do not move because they are stationary decorations. The snow is falling due to gravity. T he 

night sky is dark because it is nighttime. The street is wet due to the snowfall. The cars' headlights and taillights illumin ate the 

street by reflecting light off the wet surface.” 

“The cars are moving forward due to their engines propelling them. The streetlights and buildings are stationary due to their 

fixed position. The Christmas lights and ornaments are stationary due to being attached to the streetlights and buildings. Th e

snow is falling due to gravity. The night sky is dark due to the absence of sunlight. The street is wet due to the snowfall. The 

cars' headlights illuminate the road ahead. The streetlights provide ambient light. The buildings are lit up by the car” 

“The cars are moving forward due to their engines propelling them. The streetlights and buildings are stationary because they ar e

fixed structures. The Christmas lights and ornaments are stationary because they are attached to the streetlights and buildin gs. 

The snow is falling due to gravity. The street is wet due to the accumulation of snow on the ground. The sky is dark blue due to 

the absence of sunlight.” 

“A snowy street at night with Christmas decorations and cars driving by. The streetlights and buildings are decorated with Chr ist mas lights and ornaments .” 

“The cars are moving forward due to their momentum. The streetlights and buildings are stationary due to their fixed position .

The Christmas lights and ornaments are stationary due to their fixed position. The snow is falling down due to gravity. The night 

is dark due to the absence of sunlight.” 

“The cars are moving forward along the street, which is covered in snow. The streetlights and buildings are stationary, but t he 

lights are illuminating the scene. The snow on the ground is not in motion, but it is covering the street and sidewalks. The 

Christmas lights and ornaments are also stationary, but they are emitting light and creating reflections on the snow.” 

“The cars are moving forward on the street. The streetlights and buildings are stationary. The Christmas lights and ornaments ar e

stationary. The snow is falling downward. The street is wet due to the snowfall. The cars' headlights are illuminating the st ree t. 

The streetlights are providing light to the street. The buildings are decorated with Christmas lights and ornaments.” 

“The cars are moving forward on the street. The streetlights and buildings are stationary. The Christmas lights and ornaments ar e

hanging from the streetlights and buildings. The snow is falling down from the sky.” Figure 11. A sample from the data with annotations generated by a Vision Language Model ( VLM ). The topmost text is the global prompt and the local annotations are listed sequentially alongside a representative frame from each chunk. 

6“A car driving on a snowy road.” 

“The car moves forward on the snowy road, with its tires gripping the slippery surface to maintain traction.” 

“The tires do not grip the slippery surface, and the car maintains traction despite the lack of friction. The snowy road is 

solid and not slippery at all. The car moves forward effortlessly on the snowy road, with its tires floating above the 

ground.” 

“The car's speed is consistent with its motion, adapting to the snowy conditions for safety and efficiency.” 

“The car's speed is inconsistent with its motion, not adapting to the snowy conditions for safety and efficiency. The 

snowy conditions have no effect on the car's motion. The car moves at a constant speed regardless of the snowy 

conditions.” 

“The wheels rotate at a slower pace due to the increased friction from the snow, demonstrating the impact of the road's 

texture on motion dynamics.” 

“The wheels rotate at an unrealistically fast pace due to the increased friction from the snow, demonstrating the impact 

of the road's texture on motion dynamics. The road's texture moves backward as the car moves forward, defying the 

expected relationship between the car's motion and the road's texture.” 

“The car maintains its shape as it drives, with no visible deformations or alterations due to the cold weather.” 

“The car becomes misshapen or deformed due to the cold weather. The car's shape changes due to the cold weather. The 

car shrinks or expands due to the cold temperature.” 

“The snow on the road appears freshly fallen, with no visible signs of melting or disturbance, indicating recent 

snowfall.” 

“The snow remains perfectly undisturbed and does not melt or change shape despite exposure to sunlight and 

temperature fluctuations.” 

“The sky is clear, providing consistent lighting conditions that enhance the visibility of the snowy landscape.” 

“The colors of the sky shift rapidly, creating an otherworldly atmosphere. The visibility of the snowy landscape varies as 

the sky changes its appearance. The sky's lighting conditions are inconsistent, causing the snowy landscape to be 

illuminated by different light sources at different times.” 

“The car casts a shadow on the snow, accurately reflecting the sun's position and time of day, adding to the realism of 

the scene.” 

“The sun's position and time of day are inconsistent with the shadow cast by the car. The car casts an inaccurate shadow 

that does not reflect the sun's position and time of day.” Figure 12. A set of physics grounded and physics counterfactual prompts generated during inference. The representative frames from the generated video chunks are shown on the right. 

7“Honey pours into a cup of tea.” 

“Raindrops disturb quiet puddles.” 

> PhysVid Wan -14B  PhysVid Wan -14B

“Skateboard rolls swiftly over the bumpy sidewalk.” 

“Hand holds the phone.” 

> PhysVid Wan -14B  PhysVid Wan -14B

“Water gushes from a green garden hose.” 

“Cheese is grating through the stainless steel grater.” 

> PhysVid Wan -14B  PhysVid Wan -14B

“Water flows freely from a fully turned faucet.” 

“An electric beater whips cream in a bowl.” 

> PhysVid Wan -14B  PhysVid Wan -14B

Figure 13. Additional comparisons between PhysVid and Wan-14B . Captions are from VideoPhy. 

8Prompt: “A reed diffuser diffusing perfume oil into the room.” 

PhysVid 

PhysVid 

(without 

Counterfactual 

Prompting) 

Baseline 

Finetuned 

Prompt: “Wooden swing dangles over the sand in the sandpit.” 

PhysVid 

PhysVid 

(without 

Counterfactual 

Prompting) 

Baseline 

Finetuned 

Prompt: “A wine bottle pours a red blend into a glass.” 

PhysVid 

PhysVid 

(without 

Counterfactual 

Prompting) 

Baseline 

Finetuned 

Prompt: “Paint swirling in jar of water.” 

PhysVid 

PhysVid 

(without 

Counterfactual 

Prompting) 

Baseline 

Finetuned Figure 14. Supplementary qualitative results from the ablation study. All prompts are from VideoPhy. 

9Table 5. Configurations 

Training Base architecture Wan-1.3B Additional parameters (M) 400 

Effective batch size 64 

Number of steps 3000 

Number of epochs 4

Learning rate (Stage 1: 1000 steps, frozen base layers) 1 × 10 −5

Learning rate (Stage 2: 2000 steps, full architecture) 2 × 10 −6

Loss Flow Matching Optimizer AdamW Timestep Shift Factor 8

Number of Latent Frames per Chunk 3

Number of Latent Chunks 7

Inference Number of Denoising Steps 50 

Guidance Scale 6

Wan-1.3B Latency per Video (s) 66 

Wan-14B Latency per Video (s) 310 

PhysVid Latency per Video (s) 93 

Video Resolution 832 × 480 

FPS 16 

Duration (s) 5.06 

Frames 81 

10